Update README for 0.8.0 (#1060)
composewell/streamly: README.md

## Idiomatic Haskell at the speed of C

Streamly is a Haskell library/framework providing basic building blocks
or combinators to perform fundamental as well as advanced programming
tasks with ease. The key features it provides are:

* Speed of C
* Safety of Haskell
* Idiomatic functional programming
* Powerful abstractions
* Declarative concurrency

Let's go through some practical examples to see it working. You
can find the working code of these examples in the [streamly-examples
repository](https://github.com/composewell/streamly-examples).

## Types Overview

* `SerialT IO a` is a serial stream of values of type `a` in IO Monad.
* `AsyncT IO a` is a concurrent (async) stream of values of type `a` in IO
  Monad.
* `Unfold IO a b` is a representation of a function that converts a seed
  value of type `a` to a stream of values of type `b` in IO Monad.
* `Fold IO a b` is a representation of a function that converts a stream of
  type `a` to a final accumulator of type `b` in IO Monad.

## Modular Word Counting

> The `Fold` data type in streamly represents a consumer of stream. In

Reviewer: Is this the correct place to put info about the `Fold` data type?

Author: We are talking about composing folds in this para, so a brief intro of fold is needed.

```

### Count words (wc -w)

Count words in a file.

``` haskell
countw :: (Int, Bool) -> Word8 -> (Int, Bool)
countw (n, wasSpace) ch =
    if isSpace $ chr $ fromIntegral ch
    then (n, True)
    else (if wasSpace then n + 1 else n, False)

-- The fold accepts a stream of `Word8` and returns a word count (`Int`)
nwords :: Monad m => Fold m Word8 Int
nwords = fst <$> Fold.foldl' countw (0, True)

wcw :: String -> IO Int
wcw file =
    File.toBytes file   -- SerialT IO Word8
  & Stream.fold nwords  -- IO Int
```

### Count bytes, words and lines

We can compose the three folds together into a single fold using `Tee`
to do all the three things at once. The applicative instance of `Tee`
distributes the input to all the folds and combines the outputs using the
supplied function.

``` haskell
import qualified Streamly.Internal.Data.Fold.Tee as Tee

-- The fold accepts a stream of `Word8` and returns the three counts
countAll :: Fold IO Word8 (Int, Int, Int)
countAll = Tee.toFold $ (,,) <$> Tee Fold.length <*> Tee nlines <*> Tee nwords

wc :: String -> IO (Int, Int, Int)
wc file =
    File.toBytes file    -- SerialT IO Word8
  & Stream.fold countAll -- IO (Int, Int, Int)
```

> ### Observations

Reviewer: I don't know how I feel about observations. Is there a better way to paraphrase this at the end?

Author: We can remove it or just add a line in the previous section itself.

This example shows:

* Excellent modularity
* Simple and concise API and types
* No bytestrings required, just streams of Word8

## Performance

We compare two equivalent implementations, one using Haskell Streamly and the
other using C. The
[Haskell Streamly word counting implementation](https://github.com/composewell/streamly-examples/blob/master/examples/WordCount.hs):

```
$ time WordCount-hs gutenberg-500MB.txt
11242220 97050938 574714449 gutenberg-500MB.txt

real    0m1.825s
user    0m1.697s
sys     0m0.128s
```

[Equivalent BSD wc implementation in C](https://github.com/composewell/streamly-examples/blob/master/examples/WordCount.c):

```
$ time WordCount-c gutenberg-500MB.txt
11242220 97050938 574714449 gutenberg-500MB.txt

real    0m2.100s
user    0m1.935s
sys     0m0.165s
```

## Concurrent Word Counting

> To do word counting in parallel we divide the stream in chunks (arrays),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To count words in parallel we divide the stream into chunks (arrays),
```

Author: ok.

count properties in each chunk and then add all the counts.  We use the
same code as above except that we use an array input instead of using a
file input.

See
[WordCountParallel.hs](https://github.com/composewell/streamly-examples/blob/master/examples/WordCountParallel.hs).
for full working code including the imports that we may have omitted below.

Get the line, word, char counts in one chunk.

``` haskell
import qualified Streamly.Data.Array.Foreign as Array

countArray :: Array Word8 -> IO Counts
countArray arr =
      Stream.unfold Array.read arr            -- SerialT IO Word8
    & Stream.decodeLatin1                     -- SerialT IO Char
    & Stream.foldl' count (Counts 0 0 0 True) -- IO Counts
```
When combining the counts in two contiguous chunks, we would also need to
know whether the first element of the next chunk was a space char or
non-space to know whether the same word is continuing to the next chunk or

> if it is a new word. So add that too, giving (firstCharWasSpace, Counts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if it is a new word. Hence the return type should be of the form `(Bool, Counts)`. The first element of the tuple is `True` if the first character in the chunk is space.
```

Author: ok.

partialCounts arr = do
    let r = Array.getIndex arr 0
    case r of
        Just x -> do
            counts <- countArray arr
            return (isSpace (chr (fromIntegral x)), counts)
        Nothing -> return (False, Counts 0 0 0 True)
```

Combine the counts from two consecutive chunks.
``` haskell
addCounts :: (Bool, Counts) -> (Bool, Counts) -> (Bool, Counts)
addCounts (sp1, Counts l1 w1 c1 ws1) (sp2, Counts l2 w2 c2 ws2) =
    let wcount =
            if not ws1 && not sp2 -- no space between two chunks
            then w1 + w2 - 1
            else w1 + w2
     in (sp1, Counts (l1 + l2) wcount (c1 + c2) ws2)
```

Now put it all together, we only need to divide the stream into arrays,
apply our counting function to each array and then combine all the counts.
``` haskell
wc :: String -> IO (Bool, Counts)
wc file = do
      Stream.unfold File.readChunks file -- AheadT IO (Array Word8)
    & Stream.mapM partialCounts          -- AheadT IO (Bool, Counts)
    & Stream.maxThreads numCapabilities  -- AheadT IO (Bool, Counts)
    & Stream.fromAhead                   -- SerialT IO (Bool, Counts)
    & Stream.foldl' addCounts (False, Counts 0 0 0 True) -- IO (Bool, Counts)
```

> Note that `Stream.aheadly` is the only difference in a concurrent and

Reviewer 2: `Stream.aheadly`  is not obvious about above "Stream.fromAhead"

Author: This remained after renaming. should be fixed.

non-concurrent program. If we remove that we still have a perfectly valid,
well performing serial program. Notice, how succinctly and idiomatically

> we expressed the concurrent word counting problem.

Reviewer: This is a better way to state observations than to have a separate heading for it.

combinator makes it iterate on the directories concurrently.

See
[ListDir.hs](https://github.com/composewell/streamly-examples/blob/master/examples/ListDir.hs)
for full working code including the imports that we may have omitted below.

```haskell
...
import Streamly.Internal.Data.Stream.IsStream (iterateMapLeftsWith)

import qualified Streamly.Prelude as Stream
import qualified Streamly.Internal.FileSystem.Dir as Dir (toEither)

-- Lists a dir as a stream of (Either Dir File)
listDir :: String -> SerialT IO (Either String String)
listDir dir =
      Dir.toEither dir               -- SerialT IO (Either String String)
    & Stream.map (bimap mkAbs mkAbs) -- SerialT IO (Either String String)

    where mkAbs x = dir ++ "/" ++ x

-- | List the current directory recursively using concurrent processing
main :: IO ()
main = do
    hSetBuffering stdout LineBuffering
    let start = Stream.yield (Left ".")
    Stream.iterateMapLeftsWith Stream.ahead listDir start
        & Stream.mapM_ print
```

Notice, how succinctly and idiomatically we expressed the concurrent
directory tree traversal problem. Let us know if you can do it

> significantly better with any other language or framework.

Reviewer: This can be told commonly for all examples in the end. We can go with the assumption that folk generally don't read the text surrounding the example.

Author: ok.

Streamly supports reactive and time domain programming inherently because of
declarative concurrency. See the `Streamly.Prelude` module for some time
specific combinators like `intervalsOf` and folds like `takeInterval` in
`Streamly.Internal.Data.Fold`.  Also see pre-release sampling combinators in
the `Streamly.Internal.Data.Stream.IsStream.Top` module including `throttle`
and `debounce` like operations.

See
[AcidRain.hs](https://github.com/composewell/streamly-examples/tree/master/examples/AcidRain.hs)
and
[CirclingSquare.hs](https://github.com/composewell/streamly-examples/tree/master/examples/CirclingSquare.hs).

## More examples

Many more examples can be found in the [streamly-examples
repository](https://github.com/composewell/streamly-examples).

Streamly comes equipped with a very powerful set of abstractions to accomplish
any kind of programming tasks that you may want to throw at it. It provides,
streams, arrays, file-io, fsnotify, network-io, time domain programming
(reactive programming). See the [streamly
documentation](https://streamly.composewell.com) to know more.

## Concurrency

Streamly uses lock-free synchronization for concurrent operations. It employs

> auto-scaling of the degree of concurrency based on demand. For CPU bound tasks

Reviewer: >  It employs auto-scaling of the degree of concurrency based on demand.

Can this be rephrased, It's not easy to understand this.

Author: will do.

it tries to keep the threads close to the number of CPUs available whereas for
IO bound tasks more threads can be utilized. Parallelism can be utilized with
little overhead even if the task size is very small.  See [concurrency
benchmarks](https://github.com/composewell/concurrency-benchmarks) for detailed
performance results and a comparison with the `async` package.

## Performance

As you have seen above in the word count example, streamly enables
highly modular abstractions with the best possible performance (close to
an equivalent C program).

> For example, none of the existing Haskell libraries can work with byte

Reviewer: Although true, don't know how people will take it.

Author: This is a key differentiation.

level streams with acceptable performance. Streamly provides excellent
performance even for byte level stream operations, it is made possible
by employing efficient abstractions like `Unfold`s and terminating
`Fold`s. Byte level stream operations make programming simpler because
you do not have to deal with chunking and re-combining.

If you can write a program significantly faster in some other way or
with some other language, please let us know and we will improve. We
still have some areas to improve but we will surely get there for most

> cases.

Reviewer: > We still have some areas to improve but we will surely get there for most cases.

We can probably omit this.

Author: ok.

## Benchmarks

When it comes to stream operations, Haskell lists is the fastest
existing implementation even though it supports only pure (not monadic)
streams. Other streaming libraries are many times slower compared to

> lists, so lists is our gold standard for performance comparison.

Reviewer: > Other streaming libraries are many times slower compared to lists

Don't know how people take direct comparative statements.

Author: That's a known and acknowledged fact, also proven by streaming-benchmarks below. We can still remove or rephrase it if it does not sound ok.

In the following chart, positive y-axis displays how many times worse
is a list operation compared to the corresponding streamly operation,
negative y-axis shows the same where streamly is worse compared to
lists.

![Streamly vs Lists (time) comparison](charts-0/streamly-vs-list-time.svg)

This chart show only those operations where streamly and list
performance differs by more than 10%. For all other operations the
performance of both is more or less comparable.

See [streaming
benchmarks](https://github.com/composewell/streaming-benchmarks) for
detailed comparison with other Haskell streaming libraries.

> ## Performance and Modularity

Reviewer: We already have a `Performance` heading. Should this be named to something else. The content sounds more like `PS`-ish, notes-ish.
